% An R-based approach to global sensitivity analysis for moments of stochastic models
% Eamon O'Dea
% February 3, 2016

# Sensitivity analysis is not uncertainty analysis

\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{sensitivity-vs-uncertainty.png}

<!---
Goal: After seeing this presentation, people will understand what Sobol indices are, what they are used for, and how to calculate them for both deterministic and stochastic models in R.

Target length: 30 min, 3600--4800 words
--->

<div class="notes">
#This par provides a general definition of sensitivity analysis

Sensitivity analysis is a term I often hear people use to mean
essentially a check that your results do not dramatically change when
you change your model parameters to account for the fact that you are
not sure what the best values for them are, but it has a broader
definition. In fact, you could argue that when used in the sense I
just described, the goal is to determine the ramifications of
uncertainty in model parameters on the model output. That type of
analysis might more accurately be described as uncertainty
analysis. By contrast, sensitivity analysis can more narrowly be
defined as determing the relationship between uncertainity in output
and uncertainty in input. Thus sensitivity analysis could be a
prerequisite of an uncertainty analysis. However, as the figure shows,
the outcome of your uncertainty analyis depends on both model
sensitivity and uncertainty in the inputs. If the range of inputs
differ, a model with low sensitivity can have greater uncertainty in
the output than a model with high sensitivity. Sensitivity is a
property of the model itself and could be used for things besides
uncertainty analysis such as a powers analysis (if your model output
is a test statistic) or a model reduction procedure. In this example
the sensitivity did not depend on the inputs but in general that is of
course not the case.

</div>

# Local sensitivity analysis is not global sensitivity analysis

\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{local-vs-global.png}

<div class="notes">
#This par provides a general definition of global sensitivity analysis

A sensitivity analysis that measures the variation in uncertainty in
outputs over a range of inputs rather than at a particular point in
parameter space is known as a global sensitivity analysis. As the
figures demonstrate global and local sensitivities may differ
dramatically. Thus a local analysis may not be appropriate if you are
interested in the sensitivity of a model over a range of input space
rather than at a point. I typically associated sensitivity analysis
with an elasticity analysis which essentially just calculates the
gradient of your model at a point and is a local method. There are a
variety of global methods available. They include making scatter
plots, regression modelling, and partially ranked correlation
coefficients. One approach that makes relatively few assumptions about
your data is variance decomposition.

</div>

<div class="notes">
#This par introduces Sobol indices

A standard method of global sensitivity analysis is to decompose the
variance in a model's output into functions of successively larger
sets of input variables.
</div>

<div class="notes">
#This par describes how to calculate Sobol indices in R

The sensitivity package makes calculating Sobol indices in R easy.

- decoupling

So as usual, if you are working with deterministic models, your life
is easier. However, also as usual, with some work we can do a similar
analysis for a stochastic model.

</div>

<div class="notes">
# This par describes difficulties that occur with stochastic models

Calculating Sobol indices for stochastic models is a bit more complicated.


- memory use can be an issue, can try parallelziation

A general solution to these problems is to fit the original
simulations to a metamodel and then perform sensitivity analysis of
that metamodel.

</div>

<div class="notes">
# This par describes the joint metamodeling approach of Marrel et al.

A paper by Marrel and coauthors describes in detail one way to go about this.

The paper does not include any R code but I did find R packages that
had functions designed to carry out most of the major steps of the
method.

</div>

<div class="notes">
# This par describes how to fit a joint metamodel in R

The Dice suite of packages assists in fitting a metamodel.
</div>

<div class="notes">
# This par describes how to calculate the sobol indices from a metamodel

When the metamodels are fitted, calculating the sensitivity indices
according to the equations of Marrel and coauthors can again be done
with the sobol function.


These sobol indices can be examined along with visualization of the
metamodel to provide insight into the major relationships of the
model.

</div>

<div class="notes">
# This par describes how to visualize the metamodel

Often, we'd like to view the metamodel response and data to assess
goodness of fit and learn more about how the parameters affect the
response.

When only a few, low-rank sobol indices explain most of the variance,
you can summarize the model with a few plots.

</div>

<div class="notes">

# This par summarizes the presentation

In summary, we've seen what Sobol indices are, what they are used for,
and how to calculate them for both deterministic and stochastic models
in R.


I found several articles very helpful for learning about these methods.
</div>

<div class="notes">
# This par recommends references for further reading

Here's lists of references to both the theory and software.


</div>
